---
layout: post
title: String memory internals
date: '2012-07-28T19:39:00.000+02:00'
author: Tomasz Nurkiewicz
tags:
- bytecode
- jvm
modified_time: '2012-07-30T10:42:50.218+02:00'
blogger_id: tag:blogger.com,1999:blog-6753769565491687768.post-5865214688104815042
blogger_orig_url: https://www.nurkiewicz.com/2012/07/string-memory-internals.html
---

This article is based on [my answer on StackOverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/a/11701016/605744).
I am trying to explain how `String` class stores the texts, how interning and constant pool works.
The main point to understand here is the distinction between `String` Java object and its contents - `char[]` under [private `value` field](http://grepcode.com/file/repository.grepcode.com/java/root/jdk/openjdk/7-b147/java/lang/String.java#String.0value).
`String` is basically a wrapper around `char[]` array, encapsulating it and making it impossible to modify so the `String` can remain immutable.
Also the `String` class remembers which parts of this array is actually used (see below).
This all means that you can have two different `String` objects (quite lightweight) pointing to the same `char[]`.
I will show you few examples, together with `hashCode()` of each `String` and `hashCode()` of internal `char[] value` field (I will call it *text* to distinguish it from string).
Finally I'll show `javap -c -verbose` output, together with constant pool for my test class.
Please do not confuse class constant pool with string literal pool.
They are not quite the same.
See also [Understanding javap's output for the Constant Pool](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/5546280).

#### *Prerequisites*

For the purpose of testing I created such a utility method that breaks `String` encapsulation:

```java
private int showInternalCharArrayHashCode(String s) {
    final Field value = String.class.getDeclaredField("value");
    value.setAccessible(true);
    return value.get(s).hashCode();
}
```

It will print `hashCode()` of `char[] value`, effectively helping us understand whether this particular `String` points to the same `char[]` text or not.

#### Two string literals in a class

Let's start from the simplest example.

##### Java code

```java
String one = "abc";
String two = "abc";
```

BTW if you simply write `"ab" + "c"`, Java compiler will perform concatenation at compile time and the generated code will be exactly the same.
This only works if all strings are known at compile time.

##### Class constant pool

Each class has its own [constant pool](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_class_file#The_constant_pool) - a list of constant values that can be reused if they occur several times in the source code.
It includes common strings, numbers, method names, etc.
Here are the contents of the constant pool in our example above:

```text
const #2 = String   #38;    //  abc
//...
const #38 = Asciz   abc;
```

The important thing to note is the distinction between `String` constant object (`#2`) and Unicode encoded text `"abc"` (`#38`) that the string points to.

##### Byte code

Here is generated byte code.
Note that both `one` and `two` references are assigned with the same `#2` constant pointing to `"abc"` string:

```text
ldc #2; //String abc
astore_1    //one
ldc #2; //String abc
astore_2    //two
```

##### Output

For each example I am printing the following values:

```java
System.out.println("one.value: " + showInternalCharArrayHashCode(one));
System.out.println("two.value: " + showInternalCharArrayHashCode(two));
System.out.println("one" + System.identityHashCode(one));
System.out.println("two" + System.identityHashCode(two));
```

No surprise that both pairs are equal:

```text
one.value: 23583040
two.value: 23583040
one: 8918249
two: 8918249
```

Which means that not only both objects point to the same `char[]` (the same text underneath) so `equals()` test will pass.
But even more, `one` and `two` are the exact same references!
So `one == two` is true as well.
Obviously if `one` and `two` point to the same object then `one.value` and `two.value` must be equal.

#### Literal and `new String()`

##### Java code

Now the example we all waited for - one string literal and one new `String` using the same literal.
How will this work?

```java
String one = "abc";
String two = new String("abc");
```

The fact that `"abc"` constant is used two times in the source code should give you some hint...

##### Class constant pool

Same as above.

##### Byte code

```text
ldc #2; //String abc
astore_1    //one

new #3; //class java/lang/String
dup
ldc #2; //String abc
invokespecial   #4; //Method java/lang/String."<init>":(Ljava/lang/String;)V
astore_2    //two
```

Look carefully!
The first object is created the same way as above, no surprise.
It just takes a constant reference to already created `String` (`#2`) from the constant pool.
However the second object is created via normal constructor call.
But!
The first `String` is passed as an argument.
This can be decompiled to:

```java
String two = new String(one);
```

##### Output

The output is a bit surprising.
The second pair, representing references to `String` object is understandable - we created two `String` objects - one was created for us in the constant pool and the second one was created manually for `two`.
But why, on earth the first pair suggests that both `String` objects point to the same `char[] value` array?!

```text
one.value: 41771
two.value: 41771
one: 8388097
two: 16585653
```

It becomes clear when you look at how [`String(String)` constructor works](http://grepcode.com/file/repository.grepcode.com/java/root/jdk/openjdk/7-b147/java/lang/String.java#String.%3Cinit%3E%28java.lang.String%29) (greatly simplified here):

```java
public String(String original) {
    this.offset = original.offset;
    this.count = original.count;
    this.value = original.value;
}
```

See?
When you are creating new `String` object based on existing one, it **reuses** `char[] value`.
`String`s are immutable, there is no need to copy data structure that is known to be never modified.
Moreover, since `new String(someString)` creates an exact copy of existing string and strings are immutable, there is clearly no reason for the two to exist at the same time.
I think this is the clue of some misunderstandings: even if you have two `String` objects, they might still point to the same contents.
And as you can see the `String` object itself is quite small.

#### Runtime modification and `intern()`

##### Java code

Let's say you initially used two different strings but after some modifications they are all the same:

```java
String one = "abc";
String two = "?abc".substring(1);  //also two = "abc"
```

The Java compiler (at least mine) is not clever enough to perform such operation at compile time, have a look:

##### Class constant pool

Suddenly we ended up with two constant strings pointing to two different constant texts:

```text
const #2 = String   #44;    //  abc
const #3 = String   #45;    //  ?abc
const #44 = Asciz   abc;
const #45 = Asciz   ?abc;
```

##### Byte code

```text
ldc #2; //String abc
astore_1    //one

ldc #3; //String ?abc
iconst_1
invokevirtual   #4; //Method String.substring:(I)Ljava/lang/String;
astore_2    //two
```

The fist string is constructed as usual.
The second is created by first loading the constant `"?abc"` string and then calling `substring(1)` on it.

##### Output

No surprise here - we have two different strings, pointing to two different `char[]` texts in memory:

```text
one.value: 27379847
two.value: 7615385
one: 8388097
two: 16585653
```

Well, the texts aren't really *different*, `equals()` method will still yield `true`.
We have two unnecessary copies of the same text.
Now we should run two exercises.
First, try running:

```java
two = two.intern();
```

before printing hash codes.
Not only both `one` and `two` point to the same text, but they are the same reference!

```text
one.value: 11108810
two.value: 11108810
one: 15184449
two: 15184449
```

This means both `one.equals(two)` and `one == two` tests will pass.
Also we saved some memory because `"abc"` text appears only once in memory (the second copy will be garbage collected).
The second exercise is slightly different, check out this:

```java
String one = "abc";
String two = "abc".substring(1);
```

Obviously `one` and `two` are two different objects, pointing to two different texts.
But how come the output suggests that they both point to the same `char[]` array?!?

```text

one.value: 23583040
two.value: 23583040
one: 11108810
two: 8918249
```

I'll leave the answer to you.
It'll teach you how `substring()` works, what are the advantages of such approach and when it can [lead to big troubles](http://stackoverflow.com/a/1281569).

#### Lessons learnt

- `String` object itself is rather cheap.
  It's the text it points to that consumes most of the memory
- `String` is just a thin wrapper around `char[]` to preserve immutability
- `new String("abc")` isn't really *that* expensive as the internal text representation is reused.
  But still avoid such construct.
- When `String` is concatenated from constant values known at compile time, concatenation is done by the compiler, not by the JVM
- `substring()` is tricky, but most importantly, it is very cheap, both in terms of used memory and run time (constant in both cases)
